\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename help2man.info
@settitle @command{help2man} Reference Manual
@setchapternewpage on
@finalout

@dircategory GNU programming support
@direntry
* help2man: (help2man).      Automatic manual page generation.
@end direntry

@ifinfo
This file documents the GNU @command{help2man} command which produces
simple manual pages from the @samp{--help} and @samp{--version} output
of other commands.

Copyright (C) 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2009, 2010
Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Foundation.
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title help2man
@subtitle A utility for generating simple manual pages
@author Brendan O'Dea @email{bod@@debian.org}

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2009
Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Foundation.
@end titlepage

@ifinfo
@node Top
@top @command{help2man}

@command{help2man} produces simple manual pages from the @samp{--help}
and @samp{--version} output of other commands.

@menu
* Overview::                    Overview of @command{help2man}.
* Invoking help2man::           How to run @command{help2man}.
* Including text::              Including additional text in the output.
* --help recommendations::      Recommended formatting for --help output.
* Makefile usage::              Using @command{help2man} with @command{make}.
* Localised man pages::         Producing native language manual pages.
* Reports::                     Reporting bugs or suggestions.
* Availability::                Obtaining @command{help2man}.
@end menu
@end ifinfo

@node Overview
@chapter Overview of @command{help2man}

@command{help2man} is a tool for automatically generating simple
manual pages from program output.

Although manual pages are optional for GNU programs other projects,
such as Debian require them (@pxref{Man Pages, , , standards, The GNU
Coding Standards})

This program is intended to provide an easy way for software authors
to include a manual page in their distribution without having to
maintain that document.

Given a program which produces reasonably standard @samp{--help} and
@samp{--version} outputs, @command{help2man} can re-arrange that
output into something which resembles a manual page.

@node Invoking help2man
@chapter How to Run @command{help2man}

The format for running the @command{help2man} program is:

@example
@command{help2man} [@var{option}]@dots{} @var{executable}
@end example

@command{help2man} supports the following options:

@table @samp
@item -n @var{string}
@itemx --name=@var{string}
Use @var{string} as the description for the @samp{NAME} paragraph of
the manual page.

By default (for want of anything better) this paragraph contains
@samp{manual page for @var{program} @var{version}}.

This option overrides an include file @samp{[name]} section
(@pxref{Including text}).

@item -s @var{section}
@itemx --section @var{section}
Use @var{section} as the section for the man page.  The default
section is 1.

@item -m @var{manual}
@itemx --manual=@var{manual}
Set the name of the manual section to @var{section}, used as a centred
heading for the manual page.  By default @samp{User Commands} is used
for pages in section 1, @samp{Games} for section 6 and @samp{System
Administration Utilities} for sections 8 and 1M.

@item -S @var{source}
@itemx --source=@var{source}
The program source is used as a page footer, and often contains the name
of the organisation or a suite of which the program is part.  By default
the value is the package name and version.

@item -L @var{locale}
@itemx --locale=@var{locale}
Select output locale (default @samp{C}).  Both the program and
@command{help2man} must support the given @var{locale}
(@pxref{Localised man pages}).

@item -i @var{file}
@itemx --include=@var{file}
Include material from @var{file} (@pxref{Including text}).

@item -I @var{file}
@itemx --opt-include=@var{file}
A variant of @samp{--include} for use in Makefile pattern rules which
does not require @var{file} to exist.

@item -o @var{file}
@itemx --output=@var{file}
Send output to @var{file} rather than @code{stdout}.

@item -p @var{text}
@itemx --info-page=@var{text}
Name of Texinfo manual.

@item -N
@itemx --no-info
Suppress inclusion of a @samp{SEE ALSO} paragraph directing the reader
to the Texinfo documentation.

@item --help
@itemx --version
Show help or version information.
@end table

By default @command{help2man} passes the standard @samp{--help} and
@samp{--version} options to the executable although alternatives may
be specified using:

@table @samp
@item -h @var{option}
@itemx --help-option=@var{option}
Help option string.

@item -v @var{option}
@itemx --version-option=@var{option}
Version option string.

@item --version-string=@var{string}
Version string.

@item --no-discard-stderr
Include stderr when parsing option output.
@end table

@node --help recommendations
@chapter @option{--help} Recommendations

Here are some recommendations for what to include in your
@option{--help} output.  Including these gives @command{help2man} the
best chance at generating a respectable man page, as well as
benefitting users directly.

@xref{Command-Line Interfaces,,,GNU Coding Standards,standards}, and
@ref{Man Pages,,,GNU Coding Standards,standards}, for the official GNU
standards relating to @option{--help} and man pages.

@itemize @bullet
@item
A synopsis of how to invoke the program.  If different usages of the
program have different invocations, then list them all.  For example
(edited for brevity):

@smallexample
Usage: cp [OPTION]... SOURCE DEST
  or:  cp [OPTION]... SOURCE... DIRECTORY
@dots{}
@end smallexample

Use @code{argv[0]} for the program name in these synopses, just as it
is, with no directory stripping.  This is in contrast to the canonical
(constant) name of the program which is used in @option{--version}.

@item
A very brief explanation of what the program does, including default
and/or typical behaviour.  For example, here is @command{cp}'s:

@example
Copy SOURCE to DEST, or multiple SOURCE(s) to DIRECTORY.
@end example

@item
A list of options, indented to column 2.  If the program supports
one-character options, put those first, then the equivalent long option
(if any).  If the option takes an argument, include that too, giving it
a meaningful name.  Align the descriptions in a convenient column, if
desired.  Note that to be correctly recognised by @command{help2man}
the description must be separated from the options by at least two
spaces and descriptions continued on subsequent lines must start at
the same column.

Here again is an (edited) excerpt from @command{cp}, showing a short
option with an equivalent long option, a long option only, and a short
option only:

@smallexample
  -a, --archive                same as -dpR
      --backup[=CONTROL]       make a backup of each ...
  -b                           like --backup but ...
@end smallexample

For programs that take many options, it may be desirable to split the
option list into sections such as `Global', `Output control', or
whatever makes sense in the particular case.  It is usually best to
alphabetise (by short option name first, then long) within each section,
or the entire list if there are no sections.

@item
Any useful additional information about program behaviour, such as
influential environment variables, further explanation of options, etc.
For example, @command{cp} discusses @env{VERSION_CONTROL} and sparse
files.

@item
A few examples of typical usage, at your discretion.  One good example
is usually worth a thousand words of description, so this is
highly recommended.

@item
@cindex address for bug reports
@cindex bug reports
In closing, a line stating how to email bug reports.  Typically,
@var{mailing-address} will be @samp{bug-@var{program}@@gnu.org}; please
use this form for GNU programs whenever possible.  It's also good to
mention the home page of the program, other mailing lists, etc.

@end itemize

The @code{argp} and @code{popt} programming interfaces let you specify
option descriptions for @option{--help} in the same structure as the
rest of the option definition; you may wish to consider using these
routines for option parsing instead of @code{getopt}.

@node Including text
@chapter Including Additional Text in the Output

Additional static text may be included in the generated manual page by
using the @samp{--include} and @samp{--opt-include} options
(@pxref{Invoking help2man}).  While these files can be named anything,
for consistency we suggest to use the extension @code{.h2m} for
help2man include files.

The format for files included with these option is simple:

@example
[section]
text

/pattern/
text
@end example

Blocks of verbatim *roff text are inserted into the output either at
the start of the given @samp{[section]} (case insensitive), or after a
paragraph matching @samp{/pattern/}.

Patterns use the Perl regular expression syntax and may be followed by
the @samp{i}, @samp{s} or @samp{m} modifiers (@pxref{perlre, ,
perlre(1), *manpages*, The @code{perlre(1)} manual page})

Lines before the first section or pattern which begin with @samp{-}
are processed as options.  Anything else is silently ignored and may
be used for comments, RCS keywords and the like.

The section output order (for those included) is:

@example
NAME
SYNOPSIS
DESCRIPTION
OPTIONS
ENVIRONMENT
FILES
EXAMPLES
@emph{other}
AUTHOR
REPORTING BUGS
COPYRIGHT
SEE ALSO
@end example

Any @samp{[name]} or @samp{[synopsis]} sections appearing in the
include file will replace what would have automatically been produced
(although you can still override the former with @samp{--name} if
required).

Other sections are prepended to the automatically produced output for
the standard sections given above, or included at @emph{other} (above)
in the order they were encountered in the include file.

@node Makefile usage
@chapter Using @command{help2man} With @command{make}

A suggested use of @command{help2man} in Makefiles is to have the
manual page depend not on the binary, but on the source file(s) in
which the @samp{--help} and @samp{--version} output are defined.

This usage allows a manual page to be generated by the maintainer and
included in the distribution without requiring the end-user to have
@command{help2man} installed.

An example rule for the program @code{prog} could be:

@example
@group
prog.1: $(srcdir)/main.c
        -$(HELP2MAN) --output=$@@ --name='an example program' ./prog
@end group
@end example

The value of @code{HELP2MAN} may be set in @code{configure.in} using
either of:

@example
AM_MISSING_PROG(HELP2MAN, help2man, $missing_dir)
@end example

for @code{automake}, or something like:

@example
AC_PATH_PROG(HELP2MAN, help2man, false // No help2man //)
@end example

for @command{autoconf} alone.

@node Localised man pages
@chapter Producing Native Language Manual Pages.

Manual pages may be produced for any locale supported by both the
program and @command{help2man}@footnote{@command{help2man} currently
supports @samp{de_DE}, @samp{fi_FI}, @samp{fr_FR}, @samp{pl_PL},
@samp{pt_BR} and @samp{sv_SE} (@pxref{Reports} for how to submit other
translations).} with the @samp{--locale} (@samp{-L}) option.

@example
help2man -L fr_FR@@euro -o cp.fr.1 cp
@end example

@section Changing the Location of Message Catalogs

When creating localised manual pages from a program's build directory it
is probable that the translations installed in the standard location
will not be (if installed at all) correct for the version of the
program being built.

A preloadable library is provided with @command{help2man} which will
intercept @code{gettext} calls configuring the location of message
catalogs for the domain given by @env{$TEXTDOMAIN} and override the
location to the path given by @env{$LOCALEDIR}.

So for example:

@example
mkdir -p tmp/fr/LC_MESSAGES
cp po/fr.gmo tmp/fr/LC_MESSAGES/@var{prog}.mo
LD_PRELOAD="/usr/lib/help2man/bindtextdomain.so" \
  LOCALEDIR=tmp \
  TEXTDOMAIN=@var{prog} \
  help2man -L fr_FR@@euro -i @var{prog}.fr.h2m -o @var{prog}.fr.1 @var{prog}
rm -rf tmp
@end example

will cause @var{prog} to load the message catalog from @samp{tmp}
rather than @samp{/usr/share/locale}.

Notes:
@itemize @bullet
@item
The generalisation of @samp{fr_FR@@euro} to @samp{fr} in the example
above is done by @code{gettext}, if a more specific match were available
it would also have been re-mapped.

@item
The inclusion of @code{preloadable_libintl.so} in @env{$LD_PRELOAD} is
required only for cases (such as @code{glibc}) where @code{gettext} is
built into libc (where @code{__open} would otherwise be satisfied
internally).

@item
This preload hack has only been tested against @command{glibc} 2.3.1
and @command{gettext} 2.3.1 on a GNU/Linux system; let me know if it
does (or doesn't) work for you (@pxref{Reports}).
@end itemize

@node Reports
@chapter Reporting Bugs or Suggestions

If you find problems or have suggestions about this program or
manual, please report them to @email{bug-help2man@@gnu.org}.

Note to translators:  when submitting new translations for
@code{po/help2man.pot} please additionally translate
@code{help2man.h2m} (used to augment the manual pages for
@code{help2man}).

@node Availability
@chapter Obtaining @command{help2man}

The latest version of this distribution is available on-line from:

@example
@url{ftp://ftp.gnu.org/gnu/help2man/}
@end example

@contents
@bye
